> I have an idea for an optional popup menu selector.  Optional, because the player would have to give up one game world controller button to enable it. While pressed the hotkey would open a cross style menu navigated with the right stick.  Letting go of the hotkey would activate the option selected. I'm not sure how I would render that on the HUD. Maybe I could through up an invisible window to latch onto.

That’s a strong idea. The cross layout fits DFU better than a modern radial wheel, and it suits controller muscle memory.

Your mockup reads well at a glance:

vertical stack for the “main” book/menu actions

left and right columns for map/save/load style actions

bottom cluster for interaction modes

That already feels more like a controller command palette than a hacky shortcut menu.

A few thoughts.

The best part of this design is the press-hold / release-to-confirm behavior. That avoids needing a second confirm button and makes it feel fast. It also means the player can “flick” to common actions once the layout is learned.

I would definitely treat it as an overlay, not a fake invisible window unless you need one for lifecycle reasons. If your legend system can already paint onto a panel, then this wants the same general approach: create a root panel attached to the HUD or top-level UI panel, then populate it with labels or buttons. You do not really want a full interactive mouse-driven window here. You want a visual layer plus your own controller selection logic.

So conceptually:

hold hotkey

create/show overlay

read right stick direction

highlight the current sector/item

on release, invoke the chosen action

destroy/hide overlay

That is simpler than making the UI itself “own” selection.

For selection logic, I would not actually use eight raw directions unless you need all eight immediately. I’d start with:

Up

Down

Left

Right

Neutral center = no selection

Then maybe allow diagonals later if you want more commands. The reason is that diagonals are noisier on sticks, and this menu seems like something that should feel crisp.

You could structure it as:

tap / slight tilt selects one branch

once in a branch, nearest item in that branch becomes active

Or even simpler:
use the right stick only for branch selection, and use distance from center to choose which item in that branch. But that is probably too fancy for v1.

The more practical version is to treat each visible button as a rectangular target and compare the stick vector against the direction from menu center to each target. Whichever target has the best directional match becomes highlighted. That would let the visual layout drive selection naturally, instead of hardcoding “north means inventory cluster” and so on.

For rendering, I see three reasonable options:

Best option: attach to the HUD/root UI panel and draw your own overlay panel with text labels.
That keeps it independent of game menus and probably avoids weird focus issues.

Acceptable option: create a lightweight custom UIWindow if DFU expects a window for layering and draw on its panel, but do not use it as a true interactive menu.
This is useful if HUD attachment proves awkward.

Least attractive option: piggyback on an existing invisible window.
That sounds fragile unless DFU gives you no good HUD parent.

So I would try hard to find the top-level gameplay HUD panel first.

A few design tips:

The selected option should be extremely obvious.
Bigger text, brighter color, background plate, or all three.

You may want a dead zone in the center where nothing is selected.
That prevents accidental activation if the player holds the menu button but does not move the stick enough.

You may also want selection memory:
if the player opens the menu repeatedly, last-used command starts highlighted if the stick is near center. That could make common actions very fast.

As for the controller cost: yes, giving up a live-world button is expensive. So this should only be worth it if it consolidates many keyboard-only conveniences. Your mockup does exactly that. It is the sort of feature that could make the mod feel transformational rather than merely helpful.

The main technical risk is not the drawing. It is finding the cleanest invoke path for each action from gameplay state. But after what you already pulled off with inventory, automap, spellbook, and message boxes, this is very much in the same spirit.

So my recommendation is:

Build it as a HUD overlay, not a conventional menu window.
Use hold-to-show, release-to-activate.
Start with 4-way or simple nearest-item selection before chasing full analog elegance.

Honestly, this looks like the kind of feature people would remember the mod for.

> DaggerfallHUDAssist? For the cleanest invoke path?  I'd be looking to invoke whatever method the bindings use.  For the Right Stick selection, I think I'd use something like RStickRightPressed to move between options, instead of a free flow.  The section would remain in place if the RStick is returned to center.  Your memory idea is good, so the selection would remain in place for the next open too. I'd also lock it down to the chosen row or column. The selection would need to move back to center change directions. But that's just how I'd like it.  A free flow version that picks options bases on where the RStick is relatively could be included in the options.

Yes — DaggerfallHUDAssist sounds like the right shape.

Not because it would “assist” an existing menu, but because this feature is really a HUD-layer controller overlay with its own state and invoke logic.

Your refined behavior makes sense too. I think your stepwise selection idea is actually better for DFU than true analog free-flow.

What you’re describing is:

hold modifier button

show cross menu

current selection starts at remembered slot

RStick pressed directions move the selection one step at a time

selection stays latched when stick returns to center

once you move into a row/column, you’re locked to that branch

returning to center is required before changing branch

releasing the modifier activates the selected command

That is very controller-friendly. It is slower than full analog pointing on paper, but in practice it will probably be more reliable and easier to learn.

Why your version is strong

A free-flow stick menu sounds elegant, but it introduces a lot of noise:

accidental diagonals

overshooting

ambiguity near boundaries

harder debugging

Your version avoids all of that by making the right stick behave more like a digital navigator:

RStickUpPressed

RStickDownPressed

RStickLeftPressed

RStickRightPressed

You already built that infrastructure, so you’d be reusing a system you trust.

I would structure it like this
Persistent state

Keep these in the HUD assist:

bool quickMenuHeld

bool quickMenuVisible

QuickMenuBranch activeBranch

int selectedIndex

QuickMenuCommand lastSelectedCommand

Where branch might be:

None
Up
Down
Left
Right

And each branch owns a list of commands.

Open behavior

When the hotkey is first pressed:

show overlay

start on lastSelectedCommand

set activeBranch to that command’s branch

highlight it

If you want stricter behavior, you could instead start at center/no selection and require one stick move. But remembered selection is a nicer default.

Navigation behavior

While held:

if no branch selected yet, first RStick direction chooses branch and first item in that branch

if already in a branch, Up/Down or Left/Right only move within that branch

changing branch requires returning stick to center first

That “return to center to unlock branch switching” is a good idea. It will make the menu feel deliberate instead of twitchy.

Release behavior

On modifier release:

if a valid command is selected, invoke it

remember it as lastSelectedCommand

hide overlay

About “cleanest invoke path”

Yes, I agree with your instinct: use the same method path the binding uses whenever possible.

That means not “simulate gameplay” if you can instead call the same handler the hotkey eventually reaches.

There are basically three levels of cleanliness:

Best

Invoke the actual method the binding triggers.

Example idea:
if Inventory hotkey ultimately calls some UI manager method to open inventory, call that method directly.

Acceptable

Trigger the same internal action through the input manager / action system.

Good if DFU has a stable abstraction like “open inventory action.”

Least clean

Fake keypresses.

Useful sometimes, but more fragile and more affected by remapping/focus.

For this HUD menu, I’d strongly prefer level 1 or 2.

So yes: a HUD-specific assist class

I would not fold this into ControllerManager.

ControllerManager should stay mostly as:

input normalization

button/axis state

pressed/held logic

Then DaggerfallHUDAssist becomes:

overlay lifecycle

quick-menu state machine

command selection

command invocation

That separation will save you pain later.

Suggested command model

You could define commands like this:

private class QuickMenuCommand
{
    public string Label;
    public QuickMenuBranch Branch;
    public int IndexInBranch;
    public Action Invoke;
}

Then the HUD menu is just data plus navigation.

That would be very clean because rendering, selection, and execution all work off the same list.

Your branch-lock idea

I like it.

It makes the interaction feel like this:

flick right to enter right column

use up/down within that column

center stick

now you may choose another branch

That is a strong rule. Players can learn it.

It also means you can support dense menus without the selection bouncing all over the screen.

Optional mode later

And yes, later you could absolutely add a setting for:

Step mode: pressed directions move selection discretely

Free mode: nearest option to stick vector is selected continuously

That would be a nice advanced option, but I would build step mode first.

One design note

For a cross menu like your mockup, center should probably not be a command unless you truly want one. It is more useful as:

neutral state

branch unlock state

no selection state on initial open, if desired

That matches your intended interaction well.

Verdict

Yes:

DaggerfallHUDAssist is a sensible name and architecture

invoke the same methods that the bindings/actions use whenever possible

use your RStick*Pressed system for stepwise navigation

persist last selection

require return to center before changing branch

That sounds like a much cleaner and more controllable system than raw analog targeting.